Nixpkgs documentation: reword info about version testers (#348025)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/hooks/versionCheckHook.section.md

  nativeInstallCheckInputs = [
    versionCheckHook
  ];

  doInstallCheck = true;

  # ...
})
```

> Note that for [`buildPythonPackage`](#buildpythonpackage-function) and [`buildPythonApplication`](#buildpythonapplication-function), `doInstallCheck` is enabled by default.

Author: This info about an otherwise external actor (namely the Python ecosystem) was inserted among two text blocks that describe the main character of this text, namely the versioncheckhook.

Please look at the solution proposed for this.

- `postVersionCheck`: Hook that runs after the check is done. Defaults to an empty string.

Note: see also [`testers.testVersion`](#tester-testVersion).

## Comparison between `versionCheckHook` and `testers.testVersion` {#versioncheckhook-comparison-testversion}

The most notable difference between `versionCheckHook` and `testers.testVersion` is that `versionCheckHook` runs as a phase during the build time of the package, while `passthru.tests.versions` executes a whole derivation that depends on the package.

Below we list some advantages of `testers.testVersion` over `versionCheckHook`:

- `testers.testVersion` is a derivation, having access to the whole features provided by Nix and Nixpkgs
  - E.g. extra tools, customized programs etc.
- `testers.testVersion` is executed in an identical environment of a consumer would, independent of the environment it was built.
- `testers.testVersion` can be executed without rebuilding the package, saving time especially when the rebuild takes too long.
- `testers.testVersion` do not add overhead to each build, since it runs after the build, not during it.

>   - Arguably, the overhead of `versionCheckHook` is negligible, so this point is not much a difference.g

Author: Since this was converted into a table, I will not deal with gravestone comments.

  nativeInstallCheckInputs = [
    versionCheckHook
  ];

  doInstallCheck = true;

  # ...
})
```

> :::

Author: The triple dot?

It closes the `::: {.example . . .}` block.
I don't remember if this is mandatory or merely recommended, but example code is usually enclosed in blocks like these.

| Customization                             | Besides the attributes described above, `versionCheckHook` provides no other methods for controlling it.                                                                | `tests.version` has access to the whole feature set of Nixpkgs, like multiple version test derivations and tools outside the package inputs. |
| Execution time                            | `versionCheckHook` is executed automatically whenever the package is executed, e.g. `nix-build -A pkg`, since it is a phase executed during the package build time.     | `tests.version` is executed only when explicitly called, e.g. `nix-build -A pkg.tests.version`; it is executed after package build time.     |
| Execution environment                     | `versionCheckHook` uses `env --ignore-environment --chdir=/` to run the executables in an environment as clean as possible, but there is no way to change its behavior. | `tests.version` executes in an environment identical to that of a consumer, independent from the package build environment.                  |

> | Rebuild after modification                | Modifying `versionCheckHook` triggers the package rebuild.                                                                                                              | `tests.version` does not rebuild the package, since it runs after package build time.                                                        |

Reviewer: Another accuracy nit:

```suggestion
| Rebuild after modification of hook/test derivation | Modifying `versionCheckHook` triggers rebuilds for all packages using it.                                                                                                              | Doesn't require rebuilding the package, as the test derivation is independent of it. |
```

> | Overhead during package build time        | Negligible. Although executed during the the package build time, `versionCheckHook` is lean and executes few commands.                                                  | Zero, since `tests.version` is a derivation that runs after package build time.                                                              |

Reviewer: Can be more accurate:

```suggestion
| Overhead during package build time        | Negligible - executes the main package's command 1-2 times, during the package's build time. | Zero, since `tests.version` is an independent derivation. |
```

It's the 2nd time you write "a derivation that runs after a package build time" or something roughly the same - I hope you are OK with the fact I emphasize that not necessarily people will build (and not run) that derivation, because people might forget to do it by themselves or look at ofborg's attempts (which are [sometimes](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/353607#issuecomment-2456283386) inaccurate).

> | Failure detection time                    | `versionCheckHook` runs during the package build time, therefore it does not deal with failures happening after that.                                                   | `tests.version` detects failures after package build time, like rewritings and relocations.                                                  |

Reviewer: I don't understand this line of comparison. Do you mean "when will `versionCheckHook`/`testVersion` tell us a package is failing? Is this supposed to be the content-addressed derivations related line? What do you mean by failures happening after builds? Again perhaps my lack of CA derivations knowledge is holding me back from understanding.

> | Package breakage awareness                | Loud and clear as soon as `versionCheckHook` is reached during the package build time.                                                                                  | Requires specific commands to be noticed, e.g. `nix-build -A pkg.tests.version`.                                                             |

Reviewer: Small nit now:

```suggestion
| Package breakage awareness                | Loud and clear as soon as `versionCheckHook` is reached during the package build time.                                                                                  | Requires running specific commands to be noticed, e.g. `nix-build -A pkg.tests.version`.                                                             |
```

> | OfBorg CI                                 | `versionCheckHook` will be executed by OfBorg, since ofBorg automatically executes the packages affected by the pull request (PR).                                      | OfBorg supports automatic execution of `passthru.tests` for _packages directly affected_ by the PR.                                          |
> | OfBorg CI, transitive dependencies        | `versionCheckHook` will executed by OfBorg, since it builds transitive dependencies of a package affected by the PR. (????)                                             | OfBorg does not support automatic execution of `passthru.tests` for transitive dependencies,  requiring extra commands for this.             |

Reviewer: Hmm maybe each line should explain better to which ofborg behavior are we referring to. Here's my suggestion:

```suggestion
| OfBorg's [automatic building](https://github.com/NixOS/ofborg?tab=readme-ov-file#automatic-building) treatment | Will be executed as it is part of the package's build phase | Will be executed too as part of the _directly_ changed packages' `passthru.tests` |
| [`@ofborg build`](https://github.com/NixOS/ofborg?tab=readme-ov-file#commands) treatment | Will be executed too as it is part of the package's build phase | Will be executed only if you'd remember to specify the test derivation with e.g `@ofborg build pkg.passthru.tests.version` |
```

| `nixpkgs-review`                          | `versionCheckHook` will be executed by `nixpkgs-review`.                                                                                                                | `nixpkgs-review` has no support for executing `passthru.tests` at all. [^1]                                                                  |

> | `nixpkgs-review`, transitive dependencies | `versionCheckHook` will be executed by `nixpkgs-review`, since the tool reaches transitive dependencies automatically.                                                  | `nixpkgs-review` has no support for executing `passthru.tests` at all,  even for transitive dependencies. [^1]                               |

Reviewer: Here it is weird to split these to 2 lines, as nixpkgs-review always acts upon all affected packages.

- `postVersionCheck`: Hook that runs after the check is done. Defaults to an empty string.

Note: see also [`testers.testVersion`](#tester-testVersion).

## Comparison between `versionCheckHook` and `testers.testVersion` {#versioncheckhook-comparison-testversion}

The most notable difference between `versionCheckHook` and `testers.testVersion` is that `versionCheckHook` runs as a phase during the build time of the package, while `passthru.tests.versions` executes a whole derivation that depends on the package.

Given the current limitations of Nixpkgs's tooling and CI, `versionCheckHook` fits better in most of typical situations.

Below we tabulate the differences between `versionCheckHook` and `testers.testVersion`.

| Item                                   | `versionCheckHook`                                                                                                                                            | `testers.testVersion`                                                                                                                                                                                       |

> |:---------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|

Reviewer: Nit: Looks better IMO when lines are aligned to the left.

Author: I will remove these lines, at least until I discover why the manual was not built.

| Rebuild after modification             | The hook rebuilds the package when the hook is modified, since it is a phase running during the build time of the package.                                    | The tester does not require rebuilding the package, since it is a derivation.                                                                                                                               |
| Overhead during package building       | Negligible. Although running during the build time of the package, the hook is lean and executes few commands.                                                | Zero, since the tester is a derivation that runs after package building.                                                                                                                                    |

> | Content-addressed-derivation awareness | Since it runs during the building, the hook does not deal with failures happening after building, like rewritings that happen post installation.              | Since it runs after the building, the tester detects failures at this time.                                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer: I must say that I don't understand this line of comparison at all. But maybe it is just me, who is not very well familiar with content addressed derivations...

Author: The citation of CA will change to something more general.

| Execution by `nixpkgs-review` tool     | Yes, since the hook is a phase running during the build time of the package.                                                                                  | No, since the tool has no support for executing `passthru.tests`. [^1]                                                                                                                                      |
| Package breakage awareness             | Loud and clear as soon as the hook is reached, since it is a phase running during the build time of the package.                                              | Requires specific command to be noticed, e.g. `nix-build -A pkg.tests.version`, since it is a derivation dependent on the package                                                                           |

> | Transitive package breakage            | Never ever goes unnoticed by `nixpkgs-review`, since the tool executes the transitive dependencies.                                                           | Since human beings are prone to forget the duty of running passthru tests and `nixpkgs-review` has no support for running it, it certainly goes unnoticed.                                                  |

Reviewer: Haha this:

> human beings are prone to forget the duty of running passthru tests

Is a very blaming phrasing.. I don't think there is a consensus that people should run `passthru.tests` of all packages they use on their system regularly or whatever. It is not exactly clear in which context it would be correct to blame someone about such a breakage. My opinion is that no one should be blamed for not doing something that our tooling doesn't allow them to easily do.

Author: I will remove references to less-than-omniscient things in the next iteration.

> | Transitive package breakage            | Never ever goes unnoticed by `nixpkgs-review`, since the tool executes the transitive dependencies.                                                           | Since human beings are prone to forget the duty of running passthru tests and `nixpkgs-review` has no support for running it, it certainly goes unnoticed.                                                  |

Reviewer: In general, it is not very clear from reading the 1st column of these 2 lines, what exactly is being compared. I understand how you wanted to make it more concise then in the table I wrote in my previous review, but it is not exactly clear what does "breakage" mean, in which context? In Nixpkgs PRs? Or in a user's NixOS system? Or in Hydra?

I admit that even in my table the last line could have been a bit clearer, (I hope you will forgive me for demanding better clarity when this is something that everyone will read v.s something only you read when I suggest something for your PR).

Author: > but it is not exactly clear what does "breakage" mean

Breakage is any event that triggers the respective tool.

> , in which context? In Nixpkgs PRs? Or in a user's NixOS system? Or in Hydra?

It does not matter who is the one that triggers the event.

`versionCheckHook` is triggered by anyone that tries to build the package containing it, whether it is a `nixos-rebuild  switch` executed by a GitHub Action or a user running commands in a Powershell instance.

The same can be said about `passthru.tests.version` _mutatis mutandis_.

Reviewer: > > but it is not exactly clear what does "breakage" mean
> 
> Breakage is any event that triggers the respective tool.

The respective tool is nixpkgs-review or ofborg? Or the package itself?

> > , in which context? In Nixpkgs PRs? Or in a user's NixOS system? Or in Hydra?
> 
> It does not matter who is the one that triggers the event.

I disagree, because in any of the above contexts there are different chances of a package with `versionCheckHook` or a package's `passthru.tests.version` derivation to be built. This distinction is a very important point for comparison, and the first column of these 2 lines don't make it clear to which context you are referring to.
 
> `versionCheckHook` is triggered by anyone that tries to build the package containing it, whether it is a `nixos-rebuild switch` executed by a GitHub Action or a user running commands in a Powershell instance.

Thanks for adding to the list of possible contexts :). To summarize, the possible contexts I see are:

- A user builds locally packages in a modified Nixpkgs checkout.
- `nixpkgs-review` in a PR.
- Someone running `@ofborg build` in a PR.
- A user running `nixos-rebuild`.
- A GitHub action running `nixos-rebuild`, and possibly other checks if configured to do so.

})
```

> Note that some builders, e.g. [`buildPythonPackage`](#buildpythonpackage-function) and [`buildPythonApplication`](#buildpythonapplication-function), enable `doInstallCheck` by default.

Reviewer: It's not such a big effort IMO to maintain here a list of all builders that enable `installCheck` phase by default. Hence, the previous phrasing is a bit more decisive and informative. This phrasing sort of suggests: "We don't keep track of which builders enable `installCheck` by default and which do, so you should inspect the source code of each if you don't want to enable it when not needed."

Author: Hum, should this paragraph be rewritten each time a new custom builder appears? I don't think so.
This paragraph looks like an example of builder, not a exhaustive listing.

Further, the documentation of these builders should provide this information, and it is the duty of a contributor to read the documentation of that builder at least.
If this info is not found in the docs, a bug report should be opened and the docs team should be pinged.

Reviewer: > Further, the documentation of these builders should provide this information, and it is the duty of a contributor to read the documentation of that builder at least.
> If this info is not found in the docs, a bug report should be opened and the docs team should be pinged.

I agree with that. But as for:

> Hum, should this paragraph be rewritten each time a new custom builder appears? I don't think so.
> This paragraph looks like an example of builder, not a exhaustive listing.

Nowadays, the list of builders that enable `installCheck` is very small, so I don't find it exhaustive to list them. I agree that theoretically if a new builder that enables `installCheck` will be added in the future to Nixpkgs, probably no one will remember or know to add it to this "list", but I doubt that will happen TBH, from my experience with Nixpkgs.

The previous phrasing also didn't suggest that the builders mentioned is the definitive list of builders that enable `installCheck` by default. I just say that your phrasing slightly more implies that maybe many more builders are enabling `installCheck`, and that is not true.

Author: Reverted, in terms. I reworded the example in a more direct sentence.

This hook is controlled by the following attributes:

- `dontVersionCheck`: When set as `true`, the hook is not added to the [`preInstallCheckHooks`](#ssec-installCheck-phase).

  Useful when one wants to load the function defined by the hook, so that it can be used for a different purpose.

  Defaults to false.

- `versionCheckProgram`: The full path to the program to be executed.

   Defaults to `${placeholder "out"}/bin/${pname}`, roughly speaking.

   The usage of `placeholder "out"` instead of `$out` here is unavoidable, since the hook does not expand environment variables.

- `versionCheckProgramArg`: The argument to be passed to `versionCheckProgram`.

  When not defined, the hook tries `--help` first and then `--version`.

  Examples: `version`, `-V`, `-v`.

- `preVersionCheck`: Hook that runs before the check is done. Defaults to an empty string.

- `postVersionCheck`: Hook that runs after the check is done. Defaults to an empty string.

> Note: see also [`testers.testVersion`](#tester-testVersion).

Reviewer: Once again, it is a bit annoying IMO to read this and to see that there is a completely different alternative and not having any reference to a comparison between the two.

Author: I moved the comparison to this file.

})
```

It does so in a clean environment (using `env --ignore-environment`), and it checks for the `${version}` string in both the `stdout` and the `stderr` of the command. It will report to you in the build log the output it received and it will fail the build if it failed to find `${version}`.

> Note that `doInstallCheck` is enabled by default for [`buildPythonPackage`](#buildpythonpackage-function) and [`buildPythonApplication`](#buildpythonapplication-function).

Reviewer: That's almost the same sentence..

Author: Yes, but without a comma "pausing" it.

  Examples: `version`, `-V`, `-v`.

- `preVersionCheck`: Hook that runs before the check is done. Defaults to an empty string.

- `postVersionCheck`: Hook that runs after the check is done. Defaults to an empty string.

Note: see also [`testers.testVersion`](#tester-testVersion).

## Comparison between `versionCheckHook` and `testers.testVersion` {#versioncheckhook-comparison-testversion}

The most notable difference between `versionCheckHook` and `testers.testVersion` is that `versionCheckHook` runs as a phase during the build time of the package, while `passthru.tests.versions` executes a whole derivation that depends on the package.

Below we list some advantages of `testers.testVersion` over `versionCheckHook`:

- `testers.testVersion` is a derivation, having access to the whole features provided by Nix and Nixpkgs
  - E.g. extra tools, customized programs etc.
- `testers.testVersion` executed in an identical environment of a consumer would, independent of the environment it was built.
- `testers.testVersion` can be executed without rebuilding the package, saving time especially when the rebuild takes too much time.

> - `testers.testVersion` do not add overhead to each build, since it runs after the build, not during it.

Reviewer: Calling this an overhead is an overstatement IMO.

Author: Objectively the overhead of testVersion is zero.

I will add an extra bullet.

- When a pull request is opened against Nixpkgs repository, [ofborg](https://github.com/NixOS/ofborg)'s CI will automatically run `passthru.tests` attributes for the packages that are [directly changed by your PR (according to your commits' messages)](https://github.com/NixOS/ofborg?tab=readme-ov-file#automatic-building).

  However, ofBorg does not run the `passthru.tests` attributes for _transitive dependencies_ of those packages. To execute them, commands like [`@ofborg build dependency1.tests dependency2.tests ...`](https://github.com/NixOS/ofborg?tab=readme-ov-file#build) are needed.

  On the other hand, `versionCheckHook` will be executed as a regular phase during the build time of the derivation, therefore it will be indirectly executed by ofBorg, working around this limitation.

- Since [`nixpkgs-review`](https://github.com/Mic92/nixpkgs-review) does not execute `passthru.tests` attributes, it will not execute `passthru.tests.version`.

  On the other hand, `versionCheckHook` will be executed as a regular phase during the build time of the derivation, therefore it will be indirectly executed by `nixpkgs-review`, working around this limitation.

> Given the current limitations of Nixpkgs's tooling and CI demonstrated above, `versionCheckHook` fits better in most of typical situations.

Reviewer: I'm excited to see you wrote this eventually :smiley: .
